In this video, I'll be discussing
the final modifier when used
to modify a class definition.
So, start off by creating
a new project in IntelliJ
called Fundamentals.
You can see that I’ve
done that already.
We then need to create a
new class in this project,
which I’ll go ahead and do.
We'll call this one First Final Test.
Well, I'll just go to full
screen and I’m going to
copy and paste some code in.
Now, in terms of copying and
pasting code, I'm going to be
doing that throughout this course.
Exactly the same as
what I did with part1.
And this saves you having to watch
me type in all the code, which
obviously is of little value.
It would just dramatically
extend the size of the course.
So to follow along, the code
snippets that I'm copying and
pasting are available in a single
file in the resource section
of this video, and all videos
as you go through the course.
It's also available as a bulk download
in the last section of the course.
So grab that if you need to.
And I suggest you, you copy and
paste as I’m doing and I really
recommend that because ultimately
you will retain the knowledge of
what you're learning in these videos.
All right, so let's look at the
code that I’ve just pasted in here.
The code contains two package
private classes and one public one.
Looking at the first class there, you
can see it's called ExtendMeOptional.
Now, it's unmodified and it's
got two methods - a public
method and a public final method.
Moving on down, we've got
this second class here.
This is the final class
– ExtendMeNotAllowed, so it's obviously
using the final modifier and that's
also got two methods - a public
method and a public final method.
Looking at the last class here
on screen there now, that's our
public class that we created,
FirstFinalTest that instantiates
two objects, one for the class
ExtendMeOptional and one for
the final class ExtendMeNotAllowed.
And then it's executing
both methods on each object.
Let's execute the code.
You can see it's produced
the output below.
From that, we can see that a final
class isn't different in any other
way from a non-final class when it
comes to instantiating an object
and executing methods on the object.
The differences with the final
modifier at both the class and the
method declarations level apply to
the declaring class's relationship
with the classes that extended.
So, firstly, a final
class cannot be extended.
So let's try and do that
and see what happens.
So, I will paste in some code
right at the bottom of the class.
You can see that by doing that,
we've got a compiler error.
If we hover over that and have a
look, you can't inherit from final
ExtendMeNotAllowed because obviously,
ExtendMeNotAllowed class was final.
We can see the definition down
there at the bottom of the pop-up.
So again, a final class cannot
be used in an extends clause.
Let's copy some more code in now.
To use the regular class and then
we'll override one of the methods.
So, I'll paste in this code.
You can see that that works, we're
using the ExtendMeOptional class
now, and that the class wasn't final.
You can see the definition
there and we're overriding
the doSomething method.
If we go back up to the
top there, we can see the
doSomething method on line 12.
All right, so let's add some code
now to our main method down here
to instantiate the class that we
pasted at the bottom of the file.
We can see that we're creating an
object and then we're running both
the methods, so we'll run this now.
Now, looking at the last
two lines of output there.
You can see that we've successfully
overridden the doSomething method, but
what happens now if we try to override
the doSomethingFinally method?
And that's this one here on line
19, which is marked as final.
So, what happens when we do that?
We'll go down here and we'll actually
add to our MyFirstExtendedClass.
Let's add some code below the
definition and code for doSomething.
We've got a compiler error
- doSomethingFinally cannot
override doSomethingFinally
in ExtendMeOptional
overridden method is final.
So, you can't overwrite a final
method in a class even if the
class itself isn't declared final.
But ExtendMeOptional obviously
wasn't declared final.
You can see the definition
up there in line 10.
All right, so what I'll do just
before I finish this video, I'll
just comment out that change.
So that the code I’m leaving is
valid if you're following along,
and we'll end the video here now.
And in the next one, I want to start
taking a look at abstract classes.
See you in the next video.